Firstly, let us say thank you to Heritage Lottery Wales for funding this short project
which is intended to share memories about Butetown, Cardiff Bay and the docks from people
who were there, knew about it and were a part of it.
Now this episode is split into two, this is the first of the two episodes, but this episode
is with Beryl Makers, me Freeman, who comes from a very, very famous sporting family.
And Beryl is in every sense a personality.
Childhood, yours?
Oh yes, but as I said, you don't know where that is, you Victoria Park in Cardiff, I'll
say Campton, we were all born in Campton, because my grandmother lives there.
And then when my grandmother passed, my father said, oh my dad had moved down the dock.
So we came down here, I think I was three when we moved down.
And we lived in the same house all those years until they pulled it down, they pulled the
houses down.
But oh, I'm sorry to leave Sophia Street, you know, everybody, I mean, all that, well
a lot of them here now, but I mean, a lot of the neighbors, I mean, they all row, both
sides, different nationalities, you know, next door to us, in fact it was Adam, on the
other side it was Norwegian, then you move up and the girl I went to school with across
from me, Selma, her father was Norwegian, you know, so we were all, you know, different
nationalities and we all got on great.
So where were your parents from?
Oh, my mother was from here.
So my father came from the West Indies when he was 17.
But my mother, my mother was born in the bay.
And then when my grandfather died, no, before my grandfather died, because he was with someone
else, we moved to Campton with my nana.
And then we stayed there.
And of course, I was three, four when I moved down here.
Yeah.
So, but my father, he was from 17, he was 17.
He was a merchant seaman, was he?
Yes, yes.
He was a cook.
And my mother was auntie to Joey Erskine, the boxer.
Yeah, yeah.
Yeah.
Because Johnny Erskine and my mother were brother and sister.
And then my father, my mother was brother and sister.
And then when my brother got older, they picked him for rugby and then he played for Halifax
up in Yorkshire.
Right.
Yeah.
Billy Boston, you know Billy Boston?
Yeah, yeah.
Yeah, Billy Boston played for Wigan, Johnny played for Halifax and a couple of other boys.
Was that Johnny Freeman, was it?
Yeah.
Yeah, right, yeah, yeah.
That was my brother.
Yeah.
And Billy Boston was his mate.
But he went to Wigan and Johnny went to Halifax.
I mean, from your, I mean, I guess it must be your great grandmother's time.
She had a hell of a lot of sports people in her, in her children and descendants, didn't she?
Gosh.
I mean, you know.
Yeah, that was like, yeah, my mother's mother.
Yeah, because there's a picture and I say, oh, I'll show you.
She said, when he was about 18 and she said, oh, I'll bring it up on my mobile phone.
She said, when I see you again, I'll show you.
There was a picture of Johnny, Billy and Joey and they were all together.
Yeah.
And Joey was the best man in my brother's wedding.
I mean, I had a conversation recently just out the blue with Joe's son, Joe Erskine Jr.
Oh, I don't know what he...
He's up in Derby, lives up in Derby.
Oh, I see.
And he didn't know.
And it's funny, people don't know, because they move away, they don't know the details of their own history.
And he knew his family were black, but he didn't know where from.
And he didn't know, was it Eustace Erskine? Was that it?
He was from...
My grandfather?
Yeah.
Uriah?
Uriah Erskine.
He didn't know Uriah was from Jamaica.
Oh, wow.
He didn't know.
And it's funny...
He didn't know he had black in him.
He did, but he didn't know where it was from.
Oh, right.
Yeah.
Yeah, Uriah.
See, my grandmother was married to him.
Yeah.
And then she had three daughters.
And then he went with Joe Erskine's grandmother.
Right.
And he lived with her.
And they had a boarding house in Moriah Street.
And then, of course, my grandmother...
My grandmother was from Chelmsford in Essex.
Right.
My grandmother was.
And then when her father went to hide, she moved to London.
Because she was living in Chelmsford, I think.
She moved to London, and she had a house there.
And then the woman next door said...
Because she had a boarding house, and she said...
Oh, she had moved to the side of the house that...
You know, my grandfather just came from the West Indies.
Right.
And he had...
Oh, she said, oh, no.
You know, she said, oh, go on.
It's only for a couple of nights.
And...
Yeah, well...
Going up to show in the room...
She went down on her knees on the stairs.
And she said to the woman next door,
someone's going to get married.
Yeah, my grandmother married him, yeah.
Yeah.
And then they moved to Kersley.
And then, of course, he had the...
Like, my mother, my auntie Louie, my auntie Lillie.
He had, and then...
He had a couple...
And then they called him...
And they called him Joey's grandmother.
And then my uncle Johnny.
And you can see, being the auntie from Mothers,
my uncle Johnny, that's Joey's father,
him and my mother was, oh, God, very close.
Very, very close, you know.
And then he...
The first time my mother met him,
when he moved to Kansas,
and his mother sent him up to my mother's wedding.
Yeah, he was 14.
And that's the first time my mother got in with him.
Yeah.
It's...
And then, of course, I said, when we came down here,
and then my uncle Johnny, that's Joey's father,
him and my mother, oh, my God, they were close.
Yeah.
So, what else do you want to know?
Whatever.
Whatever we...
We got one love?
We got it made.
I'm a listener and you're a talker.
They're perfect.
Yeah, but I mean...
OK, tell me about school.
What was school like?
Oh, school was great.
But I didn't like school.
Which one did you go to?
South Church Street.
Right, yeah.
Yeah.
And...
Eleanor, that's all, yeah.
Billy Boston's sister was assisted by one of the others.
Yeah.
She said, this one, she always tells people,
this one was always the same.
She couldn't have cared less.
Oh, I hate to do this.
She said, and Eleanor used to be really, you know,
studying about things.
And I'd be on and be laughing and this and the other.
And they always used to call me out, the teachers.
I couldn't have cared less, honestly.
I couldn't have cared less.
My sister, Joanie, and Johnny, my brothers,
they were very into it, you know.
Yeah.
Into school.
And now Joanie, she passed a scholarship
and went to Heathrow's House.
And she, you know, had a nice job down the Dockson office.
And, you know, she loved things.
And then, of course, I just wanted to go to work.
Yeah.
Get over school and go to work.
Get some money in your pocket.
We came out when we were 13 and those things, you know.
Yeah.
And, oh, I wanted to go to work.
So, let me tell you what, let me take you back on school,
school age a bit.
What about the, did you go on the wits and treats?
Oh, gosh, yes.
It was wonderful.
This entire thing in the lorry.
Yeah.
We had a rope all around us.
This entire thing in the back of the lorry.
Yeah.
Yeah, it was wonderful.
Oh, God.
And then me and my sister, my older sister,
when everything was having something,
we'd go to that church.
So, we could go with them.
I mean, one of the boys, I can't remember,
one of the boys I interviewed, he said,
all of the Arab boys, the Muslim boys,
used to go to the church for two weeks before the trip.
So, they could get on it.
Yeah.
I was created on class.
We would have me in our school, all the schools anyway,
you know, we had all, I mean, we, I was saying to Eleanor
at the end of the day, I said,
Carmen, we come out of school, and it's so nice,
it's blonde and it's white.
And then there's my other friend, Barbara MacFer,
who's out of school, and it was Eleanor,
and we'd all have our answers on when they're coming out of school,
you know what I mean?
Yeah, I do. I do.
It was, oh, God, it was great.
We did not know anything about white, it is, and all of that.
We did not know anything about it until we grew, you know.
Yeah.
But we all had to, I mean, tell them the least,
Joni Carp is, it was white as snow, you know what I mean?
Yeah.
And we'd all have our answers all around when they're coming out,
and we'd all play together, and they'd come in the house,
and answer me, can we get in our house?
You know what I mean?
Everybody used to eat at everybody's houses.
I think the mums must have cooked for school half the time.
Yeah, because I know my friend through the lab,
I was straight, she used to say, oh, watch them, they're cooking.
Remember, they always made apple tarts and all the pastries,
they were best over.
She'd made little jam tarts and that.
So, roll it in.
She came in this day, and she did not remember the gesture of the oven.
You know what jam's like, boiling.
She pinched the jam.
And she started screaming,
Mum said, see that, you get to be nicking.
All you have to ask is if you have one.
Remember, there was always baking.
My father was a cook at sea.
I mean, I was the baby of my family,
and I'm the one who got to get their fingers around the inside of the pot.
You fight to be the one where the pot was almost empty.
Great mix, Pegs.
And you used to have the old solid metal griddle thing.
I'm 72.
Oh, yeah.
But you know what I mean, that big slab of metal and the Welsh cakes went on it.
Oh, the smell.
My mother's is round.
Yeah, but it must have been, one of the things that somebody said to me the other day was just
walking along some of the streets, you know, Sapphire and Millicent,
you could walk along them, and the smell that was coming out the aisles of the cooking,
from all the way round the world.
And where were you from?
All my family are Barry.
Oh, yeah.
We're a Barry family.
Hinds, Paynes.
Darwin Hines was my uncle.
Gwen was my auntie.
Oh, sorry, Gwen.
When you had them, the club in Barry, we used to go down there.
But that's the thing, Barry and Cardiff, people went back and forth.
Yeah, well, before my friend moved out, she lived in Caddickston.
I used to go down there a lot.
Yeah.
Yeah, I mean, that club in Barry, we used to go down there.
So, okay, what was your first job then?
Let me see, oh, the brushworks.
Right.
It was good.
And it was good in old days.
Yeah.
The brushworks, oh, I had so many jobs.
I worked in the brushworks, I worked in the cigar factory, the old cigar factory in Greenstown.
Yeah, was that Freeman's?
Yeah, yeah.
My mum worked there for a while when she came back to Wales.
When I worked in the old one in Greenstown, oh, God, it was great.
But then when I went to the one in Canaas Road, oh my God, it was like being in a, like, in a concentration camp.
Oh, no, no, I didn't like it.
Right.
I couldn't stay there long.
Oh, I had all kinds of jobs.
But then when I went to, I was in a show.
Hmm.
And yeah, because I went, my mother said to us when we were little to Miss Marjory's dancing class in Greenstown.
Right.
Used to go.
And yeah, it was good.
And then I went in a show.
Where was that?
Down in London?
Oh, yeah, we used to do London every three weeks.
Yeah, we'd go like, oh, I went all over the country.
I was 16, going on 17.
My mother didn't want me to go.
I told her, you're sent off to dancing school.
You know, I, you know, I wanted to go.
I mean, what was that show called?
Something Goes to Harlem?
Was that it?
Harlem Comes to Town.
Ah, that's the one.
No, that was the Netherlands.
Yeah, but it was Girls from the Bay went down with that as well, didn't it?
Oh, yeah, yeah.
But I'm trying to think what house it was called.
I know that my sister was in Harlem Comes to Town or something in that.
I forget what.
Yeah.
I was 16, 17.
But it was okay, the experience, you know.
Because every third week we played like Shackled Bush and Kilburn and all those places.
Yeah, it was okay.
You got about a bit then?
Oh, yeah, I met my uncle who was American.
I didn't want to say.
Ah, when was that then?
Oh, I was, let me see.
I got married when I was 20.
I'm 88 now.
Right.
So I was 20.
And I got married.
And then my uncle went back to the States and she keep on saying, when are you coming?
When are you coming?
I don't get me.
So I stayed there a while.
Yeah.
And then Massachusetts, we lived.
And then I, oh, we managed a couple of years before I got pregnant with my son.
And I said, oh, no, I'm not having him here.
I'm going home.
I went home.
I went home and I'm clean.
And then I said, right.
Oh, when you coming back?
When you coming back?
I'm coming soon.
He had a dental fly in those days.
Actually, I had a fly in.
And he used to say, I'm going to ship and you can't even swim.
So I went back with Craig.
He was about five months old, I should think.
And then I stayed for a while and then my youngest sister was getting married.
And I said, oh, I want to go home for the wedding.
So he said, you're always back and forth.
He said, OK.
He said, you're not going to stay long.
I said, oh, no.
I came back for my sister's wedding and never went back.
But my sister was my roommate.
I was there every year in the States.
I used to work the year into what I am being lately because all this lockdown and the
hangover of the country.
Me and Janice, that's my niece.
We were there.
Let me see.
The one last year was the year before.
Right.
Yeah, because I got nieces and nephews in California and in Illinois and that.
My sisters, children.
So what happened to your husband then?
You just dumped him.
Is he what?
No, I never went back.
In the late years, I was there all the time.
And the family, even though I never went back, it's family was all they were terrific.
Every year they sent great clothes and different things.
They were a great family.
But.
The trouble is you love the bay, you love Cardiff.
That's it.
Yeah, it took me all that time to go.
And then I went and then oh God, I was so old sick.
Oh God, I was old sick.
And then I said to him, oh no, I'm not having a baby yet.
I'm going home.
Yeah, so I went.
I come home and he said, oh, when you coming back, when you coming back?
And I took him back and then I said, my sister's getting married and I'm going to the wedding.
And I went back.
And then, but then.
My sister was there.
And then I used to go where we are.
Yeah.
I mean, the point is, it's true.
Everybody I've spoken to who's from the bay and who's from Cardiff, they just miss it.
Even though it's different, they just miss it.
It is.
I might never have any trouble with people in America.
You know, I mean, I've had more than one thing said to me.
Yeah.
You know what I mean?
And in the States, maybe because my accent.
Well.
You know, it's like, oh, where you from?
But also, also maybe, Beryl, because you've been brought up in a different place.
Not prepared to take some of the nonsense that the Americans have had all their life.
You know what I mean?
Yes, yes.
But see, I didn't live in the South.
No.
I lived up in North Massachusetts, you know, one side of Boston.
Yeah.
And there was nothing like that.
But they did.
They didn't show, you know.
Yeah.
Well, they were more likely afraid of you.
I mean, my uncle went to, he said, oh, Beryl, you're going home with you.
This was before I had came.
Yeah.
Because he had to go to, he had isolated tour where you couldn't, because he's in the
airport, where you couldn't take your wife.
Oh, right.
And in Greenland they were.
In Greenland.
Oh, wow.
And he said, oh, you're not going home with you.
Because he knew if I went home, I would be.
I'll do for my friend.
And my friend, we went to school with, she lived in Arizona.
Yeah.
And she said, oh, come down here, babe.
She said, you know, so my mother-in-law, my family, you know, they all, they were lovely
people.
And they said, oh, are you going to go?
I said, oh, no, for a couple of months.
I was on there for a year until he came back from Greenland.
Yeah, so I got back just before he came back from Greenland.
Because it was an isolated tour, you know, you couldn't take your wife.
So he said, oh, Beryl, not going home with you.
He said, oh, I won't come back.
And I said, no, I'm going to Fyles in Arizona.
And that's where I went.
Oh, it was wonderful.
That was lovely.
So you've seen a bit of America then, kid?
Oh, yeah.
California.
My sister lived there.
My other sister lived in Illinois.
And yeah, I love that.
That's what I think.
It wasn't large, do you know what I said?
That's my niece.
Said, oh, that's a good job.
We didn't go.
We might not be able to get back home.
Yeah.
So where in California is your family then, kid?
No, my sister lived in Sacramento.
Yes, I was from Sacramento.
But my friend lived in Arizona.
And I was down there for nearly a year.
And we were best friends there.
And then she moved up.
And then, since before she passed, I went to see her.
To go to my sister's journey in Illinois.
She said, well, why don't you come to me for the week before your journey?
I said, OK.
So that's what I am.
That's what I've done.
OK, you sound like the right kind of person to ask this question of.
What was the nightlife like when you were around Cardiff?
What was the nightlife like?
Well, we didn't have clubs.
Well, we had this club, the Colonial Centre.
That's where Darwin was.
The Colonial Centre.
Yeah, yeah.
Yeah, very nice.
You used to have dances in there.
And that.
But then later years, these clubs were not open down here to me.
When we were teenagers, we used to go to the Colonial Centre.
Yeah.
And then people would have a party and this, that, the other.
But don't you know?
Oh, God, you don't see.
It's on many of the slides.
Oh, yeah.
Yeah.